<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!-- We have to comment out the DTD to run, but use it to validate when editing -->
<!-- <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"> --> 
<html >
  <head> <title>DryadLab</title> </head> <body> <div id="ds-body">

    <h1>Using DryadLab Modules</h1>
    <p>
	DryadLab is a collection of free, openly-licensed, high-quality, hands-on, educational modules 
	for students to engage in scientific inquiry using real data.  DryadLab modules can be easily 
	integrated into existing advanced secondary, undergraduate, and early graduate courses.
    </p>
    <p>
	Each module contains everything you need to walk students through a lesson: the data, 
	instructor background, slides with a guide to use, student handouts, assignments, assessment 
	tools, enrichment options, and references for additional resources. You can use the entire 
	module or adapt it to meet the needs of your course. It is recommended that you review all of 
	the material included in the DryadLab package. Once you understand the format they will 
	become increasingly easy to use.
    </p>

    <h2 class="ds-div-head">Overview</h2>
    <p>
	DryadLab modules contain an overview of the curriculum module. On this page you will find 
	detailed instructions on how to use the curriculum module from start to finish. Each module 
	contains two options. First you must decide which of the two options best fit the needs of your 
	class. Once you have established which option you would like to use, it is recommended that 
	you look at the procedures at a glance. This will provide you with a brief description of what is 
	required of students and the order in which to use student handouts provided. The detailed 
	procedures provide you a step-by- step guide on how to walk your students through the c 
	module. As you read through the detailed instructions it is best to reference the documents that 
	are bolded.
    </p>

    <h2 class="ds-div-head">Instructor’s Background</h2>
    <p>
	All modules are accompanied by background information for instructors. Please
	review this information prior to using the modules in class. The information
	contained on this page is mirrored in the slide presentation provided.
    </p>

    <h2 class="ds-div-head">Slides and Instructor’s Guide to Slides</h2>
    <p>
	DryadLab modules contain a slide presentation along with a guide to using that
	presentation included. The detailed procedures from the overview along with the
	guide to the slides indicate when and how to most effectively use the
	presentation in your classroom. There is text provided for each slide, but
	remember this is your module, please adjust this to fit your specific needs.
    </p>

    <h2 class="ds-div-head">Data</h2>
    <p>
	DryadLab is a project of the Dryad Digital Repository, which makes a wide
	variety of research data underlying scientific and medical publications
	discoverable, freely reusable, and citable. The data used in these modules can
	be found at datadryad.org. The data contained in your package is highly curated
	and ready for use. The modules are created to be used with Google Spreadsheet
	as it is openly available for anyone to use. It is best to have students access
	the data before you begin the module. This will allow you to trouble shoot any
	problems before students are engaged in the activities.
    </p>

    <h2 class="ds-div-head">Student Handouts</h2>
    <p>
	The modules are designed to be turnkey curriculum. Student handouts are
	provided for you and can be printed or presented in any fashion you are
	comfortable with. The student handouts are designed to scaffold the activity
	and make it accessible to anyone using the module. The detailed procedures
	found in the overview of the module will give you the best order for presenting
	these handouts to students. Many of the handouts are scaffolding tools. You
	should opt to use or exclude them based on the needs of your specific students.
	You may also want to modify them and present them in a different form. There is
	quite a bit of flexibility in how the modules are used with your students.
    </p>

    <h2 class="ds-div-head">Shortcuts and Techniques</h2>
    <p>
	Because there are several student handouts included in each module, it is best
	to print out the student handouts prior to the start of class, and create a
	packet or folder that contains all of the handouts for students in the order
	that they will use them. This will save class time and allow the module to flow
	more smoothly. Also remember that in many cases not all students require a
	handout. If they are working in groups let them share! This will save both time
	and paper. In addition this is an Open Educational Resource. We encourage you
	to modify it in anyway that will allow it to better fit your needs. The
	scaffolding techniques are provided only to make it more accessible to your
	students.
    </p>
    <p>
	If you have any questions please contact <a href="mailto:samswauger@gmail.com">samswauger@gmail.com</a>.
    </p>

    <div style="clear: both; height: 1em;">&#160;</div>
</div><!-- /#ds-body -->

  </body>
</html>
