<!--?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?-->
<!-- We have to comment out the DTD to run, but use it to validate when editing -->
<!--
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
-->
<html>
    <head>
        <title>Employment</title>
        <style type="text/css">
            div#ds-body { margin: 0px 0px 0px 0px;padding-right: 10px; top: 165px;}
        </style>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div id="ds-body">
            <h1 class="ds-div-head">Employment opportunities at Dryad</h1>
            <div class="ds-static-div primary">
	    	 <h2>Dryad Executive Director</h2>

		 	<p>Dryad Digital Repository is a leading data repository for scholarly
			research that makes the data underlying scientific publications
			discoverable, freely reusable, and citable. Dryad envisions a world
			where research data is openly available, integrated with the scholarly
			literature, and routinely re-used to create knowledge. Dryad is
			seeking an energetic, driven, and ambitious Executive Director to
			oversee development and operation of the organization during this time
			of growth and transformation, expanding partnerships with journals,
			scientific societies, research institutions, libraries, and funding
			organizations.</p>

			<p>The right person will have strong commercial awareness to enhance
			the financial stability of the organization, be an outstanding
			business manager and strategic thinker, and have exceptional execution
			skills to deliver results. The Executive Director will ensure Dryad
			meets its objectives through sound financial management and oversight
			of operations, and will report to an international, highly experienced
			Board of Directors.</p>

		<h3>Key responsibilities</h3>

			<p>Leadership:</p>
			<ul>
				<li>Serve as Dryad’s champion to the community</li>
				<li>Ensure Dryad has a long-range strategy to achieve its mission and makes consistent and timely progress</li>
				<li>Offer an innovative vision for promoting data openness in the scientific community and securing Dryad’s place as a key facilitator of data sharing</li>
				<li>Lead initiatives to develop new models for data sharing and data curation to realize a world where research data is routinely re-used to create knowledge</li>
			</ul>
			<p>Growth:</p>
			<ul>
				<li>Develop partnership and development opportunities with publishers, funders, and research institutions</li>
				<li>Craft high-quality business strategies and plans for realizing significant organizational growth both individually and through strategic partnerships</li>
				<li>Oversee evaluation and implementation of technology for data archiving and curation services that increases impact and efficiency</li>
				<li>Cultivate a dynamic and forward-thinking reputation for the organization and set strategies for marketing, communications, community relations</li>
			</ul>
			<p>Management and administration</p>
			<ul>
				<li>Provide financial oversight and develop, recommend, and monitor annual budgets, work with the Treasurer to manage cash flow, and support and pursue grant efforts that match the organization’s strategy</li>
				<li>Negotiate contract renewals, partnerships, and develop new revenue opportunities </li>
				<li>Cultivate a strong, responsive culture that focuses on fulfilling the organization’s mission, vision and values</li>
				<li>Lead day-to-day operations by overseeing staffing, training, supervision and evaluation of Dryad staff as well as contractors and project team members at other institutions</li>
			</ul>
			<p>Board relations</p>
			<ul>
				<li>Serve as non-voting officer of the Board and facilitate clear communication among the Board, project team, stakeholders and contractors</li>
				<li>Engage the Board and/or Board committees in policy discussions as needed</li>
			</ul>

		<h3>Qualifications</h3>
			<ul>
				<li>Vision. You bring fresh ideas on new ways to grow the organization</li>
				<li>Execution. You are entrepreneurial and do what it takes to produce great results</li>
				<li>Experience. You have a track record of building and scaling services</li>
				<li>Resourcefulness. You do a lot with a little, managing success in a startup environment</li>
				<li>Leadership. You inspire with action and words</li>
			</ul>

			<p>Compensation is competitive and commensurate with the selected candidate’s
			experience. Dryad also provides a full benefits package that includes comprehensive
			health benefits as well as paid time off in addition to office holidays. Location is
			flexible, but must be legally authorized to work in the United States.</p> 

			<p>To apply, send a letter of interest along with a CV to 
			<a
			href="mailto:director@datadryad.org">director@datadryad.org</a>
			by March 30, 2018 for best consideration. It is Dryad’s policy to prohibit
			unlawful discrimination and preferential treatment on the
			basis of race, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender
 			identity, national origin, ancestry, religion, veteran
			status, physical or mental disability or medical condition.</p> 
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
