<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!-- We have to comment out the DTD to run, but use it to validate when editing -->
<!-- <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"> --> <html >
<head> <title>About Dryad</title> </head> <body> <div id="ds-body">

<h1>About Dryad</h1>

<p>Dryad is an international repository of data underlying peer-reviewed
articles in the basic and applied biosciences, governed by a
consortium of <a href="/partners">journals</a>. </p>

<p>Dryad welcomes the involvement of journals, editors, publishers,
authors and others who support data archiving. Authors may submit data
files associated with their publications. Editors and journals can
facilitate their authors’ data archiving by setting up automatic
notifications to Dryad of accepted manuscripts, streamlining the
authors’ process for depositing data. To learn more about <a
href="http://wiki.datadryad.org/wiki/Submission_Integration">manuscript
submission integration</a> with Dryad, see the complete documentation
and illustrations on the Dryad documentation site, or send us an email.</p>

<p>Dryad is being developed by the <a
href="http://www.nescent.org">National Evolutionary Synthesis
Center</a> and the University of North Carolina <a
href="http://ils.unc.edu/mrc/">Metadata Research Center</a>, in
coordination with a large group of <a href="/partners">Journals and
Societies</a>. The National Evolutionary Synthesis Center is a joint
effort of Duke University, the University of North Carolina, and North
Carolina State University.</p>

	<p>An overview of Dryad's goals and philosophy is available on
	the <a href="/factSheet">Dryad Fact Sheet</a>.</p>

      <p>For more detailed information, including <a
        href="http://wiki.datadryad.org/wiki/Repository_Development_Plan">upcoming
        features</a>, <a
        href="http://wiki.datadryad.org/wiki/Metadata_Profile">details
        of the internal metadata format</a>, and <a
        href="http://wiki.datadryad.org/wiki/Publications">publications</a>,
        see the <a href="http://wiki.datadryad.org/">Dryad Documentation Site</a>. </p>

      <p>There are lots of ways to stay informed about Dryad.</p> 
      <ul class="text-list">
	<li>You are encouraged to subscribe to the <a href="http://list.datadryad.org">Dryad users mailing list</a>.  This
	  is a low traffic list, and your contact information will not be shared
	  with any other organizations.</li> 
	<li>You may also follow updates about Dryad, and other news from the world of open data, on the <a href="http://blog.datadryad.org">Dryad Blog</a>.</li> 
	<li>Dryad posts two different Twitter feeds, one for general news about <a href="http://twitter.com/datadryad">Dryad and open data</a> (@datadryad), and one for <a href="http://twitter.com/datadryadnew">notices of new data</a> (@datadryadnew).</li> 
	<li>The <a href="http://dryad.googlecode.com">Dryad code repository</a> has instructions for more specific lists to join to learn about, and contribute to, Dryad’s software development.</li>
	<li>To really proclaim your love for Dryad, become a <a href="http://www.facebook.com/DataDryad">Facebook</a> friend.</li>
   <!--and accessorize yourself with cool swag from our <a -->
   <!--href="http://datadryad.com">online store</a>.</li> -->
      </ul>

      <h2>Funding</h2>

      <p>Dryad has received <a href="http://wiki.datadryad.org/wiki/Current_funding_and_participants">grants</a> from the Institute for Museum and Library Services (USA), the Joint Information Systems Committee (UK) and the National Science Foundation (USA).  </p>

      <h3>DryadUK</h3>
      
      <p><a href="/dryaduk">DryadUK</a> was
	a <a href="http://www.jisc.ac.uk/">JISC</a>-funded project from 2010-2011, with leadership from the <a href="http://www.bl.uk/datasets">British Library</a> 
	and Oxford University, in partnership with NESCent,
	the <a href="http://www.dcc.ac.uk/">Digital Curation Centre</a>, and
	<a href="http://www.beagrie.com/">Charles Beagrie Ltd.</a> The project resulted in a UK mirror of the Dryad repository, improved the tools available for the publication and citation of data, expanded the disciplinary range of participating journals, and further developed the business framework for an international organization dedicated to long-term data preservation.</p>
      
      <h2>Senior Personnel</h2>

      <ul class="text-list">
	<li>Todd Vision, project director (NESCent/University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill)</li>
	<li>Jane Greenberg, metadata management (&lt;MRC&gt;/University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill)</li>
	<li>Peggy Schaeffer, communications coordinator (UNC, <a href="mailto:pschaeffer@nescent.org">email Peggy</a>)</li>
	<li>Ryan Scherle, repository architect (NESCent)</li>
	<li>Hilmar Lapp, technical management (NESCent)</li>
	<li>Elena Feinstein, senior dryad curator</li>
      </ul>

      <p>With thanks to</p>
      <ul class="text-list">
        <li>@mire consulting</li>
	<li>Kevin S. Clarke</li>
	<li>Lee-Ann Coleman</li>
	<li>Adam Farquhar</li>
	<li>Brian Hole</li>
	<li>Peter Midford</li>
	<li>Heather Piwowar</li>
	<li>José R. Pérez-Agüera</li>
	<li>David M Shotton</li>
	<li>Hollie White</li>
	<li>Craig Willis </li>
      </ul>

      <h2>Technology</h2>
      <p><strong>Dryad is an open-source project.</strong></p>
      <p> Dryad is built upon the <a href="http://www.dspace.org">DSpace</a> repository software
        developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Hewlett-Packard, with a number of
        customizations. All customizations not available within the main DSpace distribution are available from the <a href="http://dryad.googlecode.com">Dryad code repository</a> under a new BSD license. </p>

    	<p>Information on programmatic access to Dryad's data is <a href="http://wiki.datadryad.org/wiki/Data_Access">available on the Dryad wiki</a>.</p>
  
      <p>Information and archives for the Dryad developer email list are available on its <a href="http://groups.google.com/group/dryad-dev/about">homepage</a>.</p>

      <p>To subscribe to the Dryad developer's list, </p>
      <div class="lastmodified">Last revised: 2011-12-2</div>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
