<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!-- We have to comment out the DTD to run, but use it to validate when editing -->
<!--
    <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
-->
<html>
	<head>
		<title>Data Archiving Policy</title>
	</head>
	<body>
		<div id="ds-body">
			<h2>Joint Data Archiving Policy (JDAP)</h2>
			<p>The JDAP is a policy of required deposition to be adopted in a coordinated fashion by Dryad
					<a href="/partners">partner journals</a>. The Joint Data Archiving Policy (JDAP) is
				distinct from Dryad. However, it is recognized that Dryad is designed in order to make the
				JDAP easier, and without JDAP there would likely be limited adoption of Dryad; thus the two
				efforts are mutually reinforcing. The following wording was agreed upon by the Dryad
				Consortium Management Board:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>&lt;&lt; Journal &gt;&gt; requires, as a condition for publication, that data supporting
					the results in the paper should be archived in an appropriate public archive, such as
					&lt;&lt; list of approved archives here &gt;&gt;. Data are important products of the
					scientific enterprise, and they should be preserved and usable for decades in the future.
					Authors may elect to have the data publicly available at time of publication, or, if the
					technology of the archive allows, may opt to embargo access to the data for a period up to
					a year after publication. Exceptions may be granted at the discretion of the editor,
					especially for sensitive information such as human subject data or the location of
					endangered species.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h2>Editorials from Dryad Partner Journals (in order of appearance)</h2>
			<ul class="text-list">
				<li>Whitlock, M. C., M. A. McPeek, M. D. Rausher, L. Rieseberg, and A. J. Moore. 2010. Data
					Archiving. <em>American Naturalist</em>. 175(2):145-146, <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/650340"
						>http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/650340</a></li>

				<li>Rieseberg, L., T. Vines, and N. Kane. 2010. Editorial and retrospective 2010. <em>Molecular
					Ecology</em>. 19(1):1-22, <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04450.x"
						>http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04450.x</a></li>

				<li>Rausher, M. D., M. A. McPeek, A. J. Moore, L. Rieseberg, and M. C. Whitlock. 2010. Data
					Archiving. <em>Evolution</em>. <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00940.x"
						>http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00940.x</a></li>

				<li>Moore, A. J., M. A. McPeek, M. D. Rausher, L. Rieseberg, and M. C. Whitlock. 2010. The
					need for archiving data in evolutionary biology. <em>Journal of Evolutionary Biology</em>. <a
						href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1420-9101.2010.01937.x"
						>http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1420-9101.2010.01937.x</a></li>

				<li>Uyenoyama, M. K. 2010. MBE editor's report. <em>Molecular Biology and Evolution</em>.
					27(3):742-743. <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msp229"
						>http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msp229</a>
				   
				</li>

				<li>Butlin, R. 2010. Data archiving. <em>Heredity</em> advance online publication. 28 April. <a
						href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/hdy.2010.43">http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/hdy.2010.43</a>
				</li>

				<li>Tseng, M. and L. Bernatchez. 2010. Editorial: 2009 in review. <em>Evolutionary Applications</em>. 3(2):93-95, <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-4571.2010.00122.x">http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-4571.2010.00122.x</a>
				</li>

				<li>Fairbairn, D. J. 2010. The advent of mandatory data archiving. <em>Evolution</em>. <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2010.01182.x">http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2010.01182.x</a>
				</li>

				<li>Wenburg, J. K. 2011. Data Archiving. <em>Journal of Fish and Wildlife Management</em>. <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.3996/1944-687X-2.1.1">http://dx.doi.org/10.3996/1944-687X-2.1.1</li>

			</ul>
			<h2>Frequently Asked Questions</h2>
			<ol>
				<li>Isn't adding to the requirements for publication going to add to the time burden we all
					share? <blockquote>
						<div>The journals behind the JDAP are committed to minimizing the burden on authors,
							while ensuring that important data is permanently archived.</div>
					</blockquote></li>

				<li>Will I be required to deposit my whole data set into the repository? <blockquote>
						<div>No, only the data required to support the claims made in the publication need to be
							archived. Of course, you are welcome to archive as much of it as you like.</div>
					</blockquote></li>

				<li>Aren't I forfeiting an intellectual property interest to my data by publicly depositing
					it? <blockquote>
						<div>The use of data carries the same intellectual debt as citation of a published
							paper. Any reuse of the data must cite the original paper from which it was
							derived.</div>
					</blockquote></li>

				<li>What if I want to run additional analysis on my data before making it available?<blockquote>
						<div>Data may be placed under embargo at the time it is archived, allowing you to
							prepare additional publications from the same original data. The JDAP (and Dryad)
							allows each data file to be placed under embargo for a period of one year from the
							publication of the associated article.</div>
					</blockquote></li>

			</ol>
			<div class="lastmodified">Last revised: 2010-11-16</div>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
